Welcome to the Blender Layout Overview!
Now, this is one of these things that most people, when they open up Blender, go
what do I do here? It is a very confusing interface,
if you haven't used 3D modeling packages before.
And some of it isn't quite intuitive, but don't worry, we'll take you through it
step by step now. So in this video, Blender looks
the same on all platforms. And this is great, it does mean that whether you're working on a
Mac, a PC, or a box running Linux it will
look the same. And you will see why that is, it's kind of its own
self contained environment. So it doesn't use the File, edit, View,
Tools, Window that you typically see on the top of most
applications. I'll be going through how to switch and change
layouts. It's a very cool feature where you can actually save a layout, if you've
found one that you like working with and, of course, you can immediately switch to it as well,
that's very very powerful! Go through the main sections
of the Blender interface, all the different window types you can have within this one
interface. And how to move and change Blender's layout. It's a
very powerful tool, and it's got lots of different variety
that you can setup. And of course, we're all using different monitor sizes.
Some of us are on a laptop, some of us have got a whopping great bit 4K monitor
in front of us. So the way that you setup Blender will be slightly differently,
based upon this. So without further ado, let's hop on over
into Blender!
So welcome back into Blender! And the first thing that we're going to cover,
in this and the next lecture, is the layout. So we'll start with a brief overview
of the layout here, to get you guys into it. It is a bit
confusing for newcomers and old hats at 3D modeling. It
is a complete unique interface.
It allows massive amounts of customization, which is
where some of the confusion could come from, because with all of that customization,
all that power that you have, we need to learn how to control that, and
before we get into the nitty gritty of modeling. I know you're itching to start making stuff,
but let's make sure that we understand the tool that we're using
a bit better, before we dive in and start modeling. Trust me on this,
if you can't control the interface it will bug you forevermore. So let's come
on and have look at the general interface here. So at the very top,
we can see it says File, Render, Window, Help,
and we've got this area here. This is Default. Now this whole area at the very top is
an Info Header. We can change that, we can move it, that's the power
of Blender. Unfortunately, if we move and hide it away it can be
difficult to find again. But don't worry, we'll go over how to resurrect missing
frames, if we need to. So we've got 5
frames or windows on this particular screen. We've got the Info Header
at the top. This big one in the middle is the 3D Editor window.
In fact, if we hover over the Header Bar's icon, on the left-hand side,
we can see that it says the current editor type for this area is Info.
If we go down here, it will say the current editor type is 3D
View, and then, we can go down here and this'll be Timeline. Now, we've got two
more on the right-hand side here. We've got Outliner and
we have Properties.
Now these icons themselves, if we click on them,
they give us the option for all the other view types that we have in Blender,
so you can go ahead and change those. You can even have two of the
same if necessary. So later on in the course, I definitely need
two of these Propertiy windows. For instance, because they've got
all of these tabs going across the top, and occasionally I don't want to keep
flicking backwards and forwards between two. An example earlier on in the
course, I might have two 3D windows open so I can move
this one up here, using this split between the two, this horizontal
line. There's also a vertical line that we can move to the left and right
as well and obviously change this bottom one to a 3D view. And then, I can
work on the same model from different angles or different view points,
which is very very powerful. So I'll just pop that back to how it
was and we can have a look at some of the other features as well.
Now we can resize those if we want to. We
can grab this vertical line that splits the two windows
up and move it from left to right, and you will find
me doing that a lot in this course. I'm running at 720
DP, so you guys can see what I'm doing with ease. Unfortunately
that gets a bit cramped [laughs] on my particular screen, so I'm often
moving things about, hiding them, etc. moving them backwards and
forwards. So I will often hide this thing to one side and then pull it out
OK, and when I need to make some changes, I try and leave it static because obviously
it takes up time moving things about. If you're working with a different monitor resolution,
bear in mind I'm at 720 P here. You could be at 4K you know, or
even 5K if you've got one of those 5K iMacs. So there's a vast
array of sizes that we can work with in Blender. And of course,
each one of use will have a slightly different layout, and we can customize
this to our own desire. Now, one of the most important things
is, before we start tweaking and moving things about is, that you're not
working on the Default Layout, otherwise you can't get back to it easily. So looking at
the Header Bar again, we can see here that it says Default.
That is the current view that we're working on. If I go to the
drop-down, just to the left of the word Default, we can see that there are
a series here of pre-defined views. And if we go ahead
and click on 3D Full View, we can see that we've got a completely
different view to what we had before. We can go to Compositing,
and that's a different type of workflow, so it gives you some
windows that are appropriate to that. We can go to, I've made a couple here as
well. So we've got Motion Tracking as well. And to make something, you
simply find something that you is close... So we can go back to Default here.
You can find something that's close to what you want and hit the Plus Button.
Once you hit that Plus Button we've added a new screen, and we can name
this whatever we like. So I can just call this Layout.
Now that we've changed it to Layout, because that's what's selected at the top
there, we can change everything on this screen to our heart's content,
without worrying about overwriting that Default Layout.
Very very powerful! Now, you'll notice that each of these
areas has a Header Bar, and every one of them, apart from the
Info window, has an actual window associated
with that Header. Now the Info does actually have
another window. If we click here we see that we get this double-headed arrow with a line
in between, on this break between the two windows. And
if I drag that down, we can see here it gives us almost like a
console of what's happening in the background. Now, often I will just hide that
out of the way, because it's not useful, however, bringing that down can help
with some sort of diagnostics later on. But I'm going to
now click and drag that back up and hide it out of the way.
Now, you can do that for all of the windows. You can re-size them and
move them about with ease. You can also
hide and move things that are part of that window. So the typical one
that I see a lot and gets people is the Header Bar.
You can actually hide the Header Bar. So you think that you're moving these windows
and resizing them, which is great, but you accidentally do this!
And you can see, instead of being at the bottom of the Header Bar here,
I'm actually at the top of the Header Bar and the arrow looks the same. So you quickly glance, you go OK,
Oh where has my Header Bar gone?
Well you can get it back. There's a little plus on the lower right-hand
side of that particular window, or the upper right-hand side if you move the Header
to the top, and I'll show you that in a few moments. And if we click that plus, the Header
Bar reappears. Now, if you are working with limited
space or you've changed the size of your windows here, we can
help collapse these words, the menu options on any
Header Bar, by right-clicking on the Header Bar and collapsing menus.
It then appears as these three lines here that we can click on and get to the
same options that we had before. So I'm going to undo that, for
the moment, by right-clicking and undoing Collapse Menus. We've
got Flip to Top, so we can actually put a Header Bar
at the top of something, which is traditionally where Header Bars would be. They'll be at the top rather
than the bottom. However, wherever you do choose to put your Header Bars,
I wouldn't swap about too often. We tend to
focus on where things are, not necessarily what they look like or
what they've called. So if you go and move things about drastically, it can actually
slow your production down quite a bit, because you're then having to
relearn where things are. Now, we're going to focus on the
3D View, briefly, here, and I'm going to show you about the Tool Shelf, which is this
area that's opened up on the left-hand side here. And on the right-hand
side there is a Properties Panel. Now, we can resize those
and may have to at any point. Of course, if you resize it and
make it too small it disappears. And there is a plus
and another plus on the top-left and right of any window
that's got these Tool Shelves and Properties Panels. So in
this particular case, I can make this bottom window larger and show
you, as well, with a UVImage Editor. I know that
that type of window actually has... Ooh, I missed a click there!
That particular window also has a plus at the top-left and right, which
means it's got a Tool Shelf and a Properties Panel devoted to it.
So we can click the pluses and make those appear.
So there we go, Tool Shelf on the left-hand side and the Properties
Panel on the right. There's also a keyboard shortcut to do that. And
with most keyboard shortcuts, they apply to the window that you're
current cursor is over. So for instance, the Tool Shelf, the shortcut
key is the Letter T. So if we go ahead and press T,
while we're over the UVImage Editor, you can see that it's enabling the Tool
Shelf on there. I'm just going to continue pressing T and move my cursor up to
this window. I haven't clicked on anything, it's just
where my cursor is, and a commong mistake is, you're trying to do an operation
and your cursor has drifted off the window you're working on. And of
course, the keys your pressing, and Blender is quite key heavy,
and you're not actually controlling the window you thought you were controlling.
Now the properties side, you can control that with the N.
Now, depending on the screen space you have, you can
obviously leave these open all the time. You'll find that I open and shut them quite
a bit, in order to give myself a bit more space, so I can show you guys what I'm doing.
Again, I'll try and minimize that as much as possible.
So now we've had a brief layout overview, I'd like you to just
play with it for a bit, so I've got a small challenge for you.
OK guys, I'd like you to play with the layout!
Now, of course, what I'd like you to do here is just make your own layout. Move the
windows about, hide some Header Bars, just get you used to the general feeling
of what's going on. So alter it, change window types and sizes
and see how, how that all pans out. Now this may seem like a very
very simple task, if you've used these sort of applications before,
but it's great to just engrain that knowledge and make sure you have it absolutely
nailed. So pause the video and give that a go!
OK guys, welcome back!
So let's go and play with the layout over in Blender, to just give you an
idea of what we can do.
OK, so we're back over in Blender here, and so straight away we can play with
the size of windows. Now, depending, as I say, on the screen that
you've got, being able to take control and resize the windows that
you have in front of you or even hide certain parts of them
and to give yourself more space is a great boon! We really want to be able
to master this interface. We'll go over creating some new windows
in the next lecture, but in this one, I just want to take control and make
sure I've got, well make sure I have control over the basics.
So I can hide those Header Bars. Now, some of these Header Bars, of course, if you
hide them you just cause yourself more grief. But in some
cases, it's very easy to accidentally hide them, like you think you're moving
one of these up and down and you don't, you do that! It can also be very
confusing, of course, if it looks something like this where it looks like we've
just got the one window here with a 3D View and a 3D Header Bar.
Actually, it's a 3D View without a Header Bar and a 3D View without
a window, the actual 3D View itself. So that's one of those things
I have seen people have an issue with in the past.
It's great to make sure that you guys will not suffer the same fate
if you accidentally hide your Header Bar there.
OK brilliant! I hope you guys are getting the feel and control of Blender's
layout! And in the next lecture, we'll be going through how to master it
and do the advanced controls on this layout, as well. And when we've absolutely nailed
the layout, we can start making some 3D models. So
congratulations guys! And
I will see you in the next lecture!